---
title: 'The Coalition for Family (but not any Family)'
summary: 'Ranting on an Easter-European political current'
date: 2018-10-13T23:27:25+02:00
displayOrder: 2
featured: true
tags: post, Romania, Eastern-Europe, religion, liberalism
---



Curtailing the rights of the LGBT community was the project of the
extreme-right Great Romania Party (PRM) more recently re-stylized by the
Coalition for Family, the main engine of the October 6-7, 2018 referendum
on the constitutional rights of the LGBT couples. The Coalition and its
political supporters from the Social Democratic Party (PSD) hopped on
the band-wagon of the right-wing populists taking by storm the US and Europe.
The Coalition's statements on the matter are pure propaganda pieces,
their arguments exhibit large holes, and, despite the respectable
language in which they are cast, are calculated to elicit only negative
emotional reactions to the possibility of homosexual unions. This
together with the hollow appeal to traditional values should give us pause.

A PRM project
=============

Curtailing the rights of the LGBT community through a revision of the
constitution was not the pet project of the Social Democrat Party (PSD)
but [that of the extreme-right Great Romania Party,
PRM](https://www.hrw.org/news/2008/02/06/letter-romanian-government-urging-protection-all-families-without-discrimination).
In 2008, it was a fringe PRM initiative advanced by 27 Senators with
very little support from other parties. The PRM did not manage to push
it through parliament. Yet Corneliu Vadim Tudor would have been
delighted to find out that one of his ideas -- not the most ambitious
one, thankfully -- has gained mainstream respectability, ten years after
his pioneering work. Indeed, the Romanian political elites deemed it
necessary to resuscitate the project, mainly because PSD is clueless in
the face of the self-made political crisis but still has the right
pedigree and disposition to ride the new international wave of
right-wing populism, which, in turn, panders to the legitimate anger of
the economically and socially disenfranchised.

The present movement does a much better job of presenting their agenda
than Vadim ever could. For this we have to thank the Coalition for
Family which does the ideological heavy-lifting, casting conservative
instincts in liberal language.

The Coalition
=============

The Coalition for Family is a group of organizations with the mission of
supporting and protecting family values. Their greatest accomplishment
so far is gathering the signatures needed to kick off a referendum for
the revision of the Romanian constitution. Three million Romanians
signed the Coalition's petition, asking that marriage be redefined as a
contract between a man and a woman rather than one between spouses, as
it was stated in the 1991 draft of the Romanian constitution.

In support of their mission, the Coalition is quick to marshal the
benefits of the family[^1]:

> Married adults, compared to unmarried, earn more, they are physically
> and emotionally healthier, happier, more productive, socially more
> engaged, drink and smoke less, live longer, have lower rates of
> domestic violence, find life to be more full of significance and
> meaning, with positive impact on their mental health. ([ Why it is
> necessary to revise the Romanian
> Constitution](http://coalitiapentrufamilie.ro/de-ce-este-necesara-revizuirea-constitutiei-romaniei/))

With all these benefits one may wonder why it shouldn't be our priority
to offer them to all Romanian citizens. The Coalition, backed by
millions of Romanians and their spiritual leaders of the Romanian
Orthodox Church (BOR), passionately opposes such 'political correct'
ideas.

The Coalition sees marriage as a contract having procreation as its main
aim. Since, of course, only a heterosexual couple can have kids, it
follows that gay couples cannot realize the main aim of marriage. The
Coalition then ties the right to marriage to the ability to have kids.
On these assumptions, gay couples should not be allowed to marry,
because they lack the ability which confers the right.

But why should the capacity to procreate be the determining factor in
giving people the right to marriage and family with the fullest legal
status? How to justify using State power to deprive certain individuals
of the right to marriage? Who does it harm? Well, the Coalition reasons
as follows:

> That will destroy the only institution that is built on the difference
> between sexes which serves the child's fundamental right to be raised
> by his mother and by his father, wherever this is possible.
> ([FAQ](http://coalitiapentrufamilie.ro/intrebari-raspunsuri-revizuirea-constitutiei/))

There are two claims here. What is allegedly being destroyed is (i) "the
only institution that is built on the difference between sexes", (ii) an
institution "which serves the child's fundamental right to be raised by
his mother and by his father, wherever this is possible".

But the first clause -- that what's harmed is "the institution of
marriage between different sexes"-- is quite perplexing as an argument
against reform. It's hard to see what we cannot justify with such
reasoning. After all, abolishing slavery harms the institution of free
white men. Equality for women harms the institution of patriarchy, an
institution that offers privileges to men but not to women. So this
abstract notion of institution, defined in opposition with any reforming
aspiration, excludes -- by definition -- any such aspiration.

The second clause -- to the effect that what is being harmed is an
institution "which serves the child's fundamental right to be raised by
his mother and by his father, wherever this is possible" -- is
inoffensive as it is stated, since a more permissive marriage law would
not impede mothers and fathers to raise their kids *wherever this is
possible*. For this often proves impossible: there are situations in
which mothers and fathers cannot raise their kids and have to place them
in a public institution, where the kids are not properly cared for.
While gay marriage does not prevent heterosexual parents from raising
their kids if they can, it can help with the kids whose natural patents
cannot. This looks like a win-win situation.

But the Coalition must have misstated their own view here, because they
are adamant about withholding the right to marriage (and the ensuing
right to adoption). So probably their point is rather this. It's not
only that in giving marriage rights to gays one destroys the institution
of marriage between sexes but also that this very institution is a
well-tested product of our tradition and shown to be the *only* one that
can protect children. Whence the battle cry, echoed also by BOR,"We want
to protect our children".[^2]

Propaganda
==========

This battle cry serves two complementary purposes. The first is that the
'protection of our children' is willfully indeterminate notion that is
partly positive (who doesn't want to protect if protection is needed?)
yet also carries negative implications, not explicitly stated but left
unspecified. It sounds laudable and at the same time gives one license
to use ones prejudices to make up dangers. They don't say we fear
homosexuality. They don't need to say, homosexuality is shameful,
disgusting, or perverse. They don't need to associate it with
pedophilia, zoophilia and so on. All they need to do is to lead their
audiences to fill in the negative details for themselves. (These effects
are calculated but the propagandist can deny that they were intended.)

Fear and disgust
----------------

To protect our children is to try to ward off a feared harm that
threatens them. Since no good reason for fear is given, the audience is
free to come up with their own fears. The reaction of some Romanians to
the possibility of homosexual unions suggests that what they fear is
allowing for *disgusting* relations. In reference to homosexuality one
often hears in the Romanian online media words like 'yuck', 'sickening',
'it's like sex with dead bodies', 'filth', 'decay' etc. Such expressions
of disgust are attributed not to things we find almost universally
disgusting -- bodily fluids and excrement, rotten meat -- but to groups
of individuals.

People respond with disgust to certain things because they believe that
such things can contaminate them. There are good evolutionary reasons to
avoid contact with things that can be contaminated and thus feeling
disgust is a protective reaction. But we also find things disgusting
even if there is no way they can contaminate us. Most people wouldn't
like spitting in their coffee and then drink it, although it is their
own saliva and no health risk is involved in ingesting it. Similarly,
most people would not enjoy consuming edible foods which nonetheless
remind them of potentially contaminated things. That's why you don't see
chocolate shaped like dog excrement, except when it is intended as a
joke or used to make a theoretical point.[^3]

Throughout the history humans often thought of certain groups as
disgusting because they thought that these groups had been contaminated
through contact with contaminated objects. Within the Indian caste
system, for instance, there was a caste whose job was to clean latrines
and who were thus considered contaminated; they were called
'untouchables'. What's more, disabled and mutilated people are often
seen as disgusting, Hitler found Jews disgusting and used disgust-laden
language to describe them: Jews were, in his mind, "the bacillus and
ferment of all social decomposition". "They would have to be treated"
Hitler added on another occasion "like tuberculosis bacilli from which a
healthy body could become infected".[^4] The examples can be multiplied.

These reactions will strike us as morally unfortunate. All of us -- I
hope -- will consider them to be poor guides to establishing rights for
people with disabilities, or of other race or social group. This holds,
of course, for homosexuals and the LGBT community more generally.

In addition to the disgust-laden vocabulary used by the supporters of
the Coalition, one can also encounter among their rationalizations the
notion that our institution of traditional marriage will be perverted
(or spoiled) if we allow homosexual marriages. This is not only the
logic of contamination driven by disgust but also a good example of
[magical thinking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magical_thinking). How
can homosexual couples spoil the relationships of their heterosexual
fellows?

Thus, although many reactions of disgust are natural they should be
brought under rational control. It would be utterly irresponsible to
wield fear and disgust to motivate political action without careful
justification. Yet there is something about the inner workings of
propaganda texts -- and I count the Coalition's publications among such
texts -- that prevents us from acknowledging the lack of legitimacy of
our 'natural' emotions.[^5] What's essential about propaganda is that
its appeal to the audience's negative emotions is implicit and this
allows them to work in the background, unquestioned. When an assumption
is stated explicitly it is more likely to be examined critically. When
it remains implicit, scrutiny takes more effort and becomes less likely,
especially when we tend instinctively to agree with the position being
thereby expressed. In the case at hand, peddling to the audience's
negative emotions for political purposes is meant to prevent the
audience from asking questions like: what do you mean by protecting our
children? Protect from what exactly? In which ways? And what's the
evidence for the claim that our children need protection in the intended
way?

Emotions in circles
-------------------

Unfortunately, the Coalition does not offer any credible answers to
these questions.[^6] Instead it invokes additional question begging
notions. It tells us, for instance, that man and woman are
*harmoniously* complementary from a biological, emotional and
psychological point of view
([FAQ](http://coalitiapentrufamilie.ro/de-ce-este-necesara-revizuirea-constitutiei-romaniei/)).
Then it adds that we already know what's harmonious and natural about
our marriage practices since the human intellect can readily perceive
such features just by looking at our tradition. We'll come back to the
topic of tradition and traditional values, but independent of them, the
Coalition's conservative argumentation is wobbly.

Notions of what's natural and harmonious tend to be subject to the same
unreasonable emotional responses that we identified earlier. Is the body
of a disabled person 'harmonious'? And what are we to conclude from its
lack of harmony? More importantly, even granting that heterosexual
couples are biologically natural or harmonious in the sense that they
can have kids, no moral (or legal) principle immediately follows from
this. This bears repeating because it's easily missed: by establishing
how the world *is*, we are not yet establishing anything about how the
world *ought* to be. For we may equally conclude from the biological
fact that only heterosexual couples may have kids that homosexual
couples need compensation for their biological limitations (rather than
the curtailing of their rights). We do have a standard moral response to
other kinds of biological limitations. After all, many sick people tend
to die 'naturally' but it does not follow from this that they do not
have the right to live. So much for the Coalition's claims that their
'natural' view is 'based on facts'.

A significant double standard that the Coalition employs is to do with
what it terms 'subjective' notions
([FAQ](http://coalitiapentrufamilie.ro/de-ce-este-necesara-revizuirea-constitutiei-romaniei/)).
When it is pointed out to them that the right of entering a loving
relationship should be guaranteed for all the people, not only for
heterosexuals, the Coalition answers that "the state cannot legislate
and protect a subjective reality" as love and similar states of mind
"cannot be objectively confirmed". Yet, while it finds love to be too
subjective to enter legal deliberation, the Coalition shows no qualms in
exploiting the fear and disgust of their audience in banning gay
marriage. (And what does it mean to say that a state of mind is too
subjective to figure in the law? Pain is subjective, but how are we
supposed to justify laws against cruelty unless we resort to the fact
that animals feel pain? Intentions too are subjective but are
nonetheless part of assessing whether a murder was premeditated or
unintentional.)

The repertoire of 'subjective realities' that the Coalition appeals to
is quite narrow, including, as it does, only negative emotions: mainly
fear and disgust. Compassion is conspicuously absent. This is not
surprising. Compassion does not lend itself to discriminatory uses. (For
the same reason, the religious among the Coalition's supporters have to
make embarrassing amendments to the Christian maxim of loving one's
neighbor or drop it altogether.) To deny the rights of a group one has
to numb the human capacity for sympathy, and hence to block any
non-prejudiced way of knowing the discriminated group. This, the
Coalition does well.

Liberal talk
------------

As I said earlier, the Coalition rises above the level of discourse
practiced a decade ago by its PRM precursors. Sometimes they stretch
their discourse a bit too far. Instructive is the following passage in
which the Coalition takes pains to make the supporters of family values
feel less isolated internationally.

> Most of those who use the example of the "West" suppose there exists a
> uniform entity that tells us the perfect road to follow. It contrasts
> hilariously with the diversity and pluralism affirmed by
> representatives of "sexual minorities" and goes towards a
> quasitotalitarian uniformity of Europe's space.
> ([FAQ](http://coalitiapentrufamilie.ro/intrebari-raspunsuri-revizuirea-constitutiei/))

The contrast that the Coalition finds hilarious is in fact no contrast
at all, since, as they perfectly know, the 'diversity' invoked in this
case is about sexual orientation and the 'uniformity' is that of equal
rights for everyone. To ensure a diverse society is to give everyone
equal rights despite the differences rather than withholding rights
based on these differences. So the hilarity must be feigned. The
Coalition's rhetorical contortions are nonetheless endearing. Are we to
understand that the various ways of discriminating against homosexuals
-- [the death penalty in
Uganda](https://edition.cnn.com/2014/02/24/world/africa/uganda-anti-gay-bill/index.html),
the preemptive attack on gay marriage rights in Romania, the
[criminalisation of gay support in
Russia](https://www.thenation.com/article/repression-and-gay-rights-russia/)
-- are all policies that make this world better and more diverse,
against the "quasitotalitarian uniformity" of moral principles and human
rights?

Traditional values
==================

For those who want to see how isolated we really are, they can just have
a look at [this
map](http://internap.hrw.org/features/features/marriage_equality/)
showing the countries that allow gay marriages or unions. You will
quickly note that all the countries that we traditionally looked up to
have already gay unions in place.

Many Romanians nowadays are exhausted by the trumpeting of Western
values. We don't need to copy them, they will say, we have our own
traditional values.

While I agree that we do not need to surrender our moral compass and
copy everything Western states do -- in particular we should not [give
in with servility to their occasional
hypocrisy](https://www.hrw.org/news/2018/05/31/lithuania/romania-ruling-highlights-cia-torture-complicity)
-- I think that national pride is misplaced when it comes to issues of
discrimination and that it is beyond any doubt that Western countries
have done much better in dealing with these issues. So a reasonable
approach to the national moral integrity suggests itself. First, we
should take pride in the good things we do, and if we don't find
anything to mention here, it becomes a bit ridiculous to embrace the bad
things just for the sake of feeling special. Second, there is nothing in
the denial of homosexual marriage -- or, if you will, in the protection
of traditional families -- that's particularly Romanian. Discrimination
against the powerless is as traditionally Romanian as breathing is, that
is, not at all. A cursory look at the history and the world around us
will suffice to show this.

In Romania of the 20th century, as in the rest of Eastern Europe
(including Russia), the family looked roughly like this. All the women
(with very few exceptions) had to marry. They married early, on average
around 20 years of age; they had to bear children and keep house (i.e.,
unpaid work). Women had to obey their husbands, as did the kids. The
inheritance was passed along to the males. A newly wed couple would not
establish a separate household but had to stay with the groom's parents
in a household headed by the groom's father. This was the patriarchal
family of the first half of the twenty century in Eastern Europe. In its
traits it was more similar to the Asian family than to the Western
family of the same period. The patriarchal family was eroded by the
Communist regimes[^7], as those pushed for industrialization and thus
moved peasants to the new urban areas where married couples lived by
themselves rather than within their extended families. The number of
educated and working women swelled during Communist rule which released
them significantly from the burdens of caring for kids and doing
housework. As a consequence, women became less economically dependent on
their husbands. So the twentieth century family evolved from an extended
to a nuclear family and from less to more rights for women (and kids).
If at the beginning of the century most couples thought that their place
within a extended patriarchal family is what tradition had always
required, at the end of the century many couples would find nothing more
natural than moving in their own flats in urban areas, with women going
to work and kids attending school.[^8]

So Romanian family values are neither unique nor immutable.

Before idealizing the present family values, I would also like to raise
another uncomfortable question about the value of these values. For it
seems to me that these family values are largely of a symbolic nature --
opportunistically wielded by politicians to flatter the nation -- values
that have only a tenuous connection with the living conditions of the
Romanian families. What good did these traditional values bring us? In
Romania, the [infant
death](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=File:Infant_mortality,_2006_and_2016_(deaths_per_1_000_live_births).png)
rate is one of the highest in Europe, surpassed only by Malta. Along
with the Bulgarians and Macedonians we top the poverty rankings. The
people at risk of poverty and social exclusion amount to [almost
40%](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=File:People_at_risk_of_poverty_or_social_exclusion,_by_country,_2008_and_2016_(%25_of_population).png)
of the population. We have the highest rates of [child
poverty](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Children_at_risk_of_poverty_or_social_exclusion).
The family
[violence](https://www.oecd.org/els/soc/SF3_4_Family_violence_Jan2013.pdf)
is not cheering either, and about [fifteen thousand
children](http://www.copii.ro/statistici-2017/) are abused each year.
With emigration at its pick, Romanian families scattered across Europe
for economic reasons, leaving behind nearly a [hundred
thousand](http://www.copii.ro/statistici-2017/) children -- the
so-called 'euro orphans'.

On a more optimistic note: even if these indicators are bad, they used
to be much worse, so we can speak of progress. Importantly, the formerly
abysmal conditions of children in orphanages are improving due to the
'non-traditional' [modernization of old style
institutions](http://www.copii.ro/programe_nat/programul-de-interes-national-inchiderea-institutiilor-de-tip-vechi-si-infiintarea-de-centre-de-recuperare-de-case-de-tip-familial-sisau-apartamente-pin-1/).

Yet let's not delude ourselves: these indicators represent hard blows on
the Romanian family. The underlying issues must be solved if we want
happy families, but very few people worry about them as they do about of
homosexual unions -- a largely inconsequential matter in the current
Romanian context. If these issues don't attract our attention, it's
because it is not in the interest of political elites to emphasize them.
It's all too convenient to scapegoat sexual minorities that nobody knows
and has sympathy for, in order to divert our attention from the real
problems. Culture wars hide political incompetence and corruption. They
reflect the deep cynicism and moral cowardice of the Romanian political
elites.

Conclusion
==========

There is one thing we should grant the Coalition.[^9] These people know
how to put up a façade. With charts and videos, a bit of knee-jerk
ethics, a FAQ section with fine prints and legalistic language, a few
references to the scientific literature in the footnotes, well-placed
pictures of bare-chested homosexuals holding their babies, flattering
thoughts about traditional values and their supporters' naked intellect,
never challenging their audiences' intuitions, with all these gimmicks,
you'd say they have come to help rather than discriminate. They are
adept at casting their profoundly illiberal thoughts in a respectable
liberal language. But, despite the efforts, the content remains vacuous.
If there is anything they want to protect it's our ignorance. The less
considerate we get the more they flourish. It's easy to see how this
language gives way to the nastiest slurs once the message is passed on
to the roughneck moralists and the Coalition's grass roots basis, adding
insults to the LGBT community's injuries. At the top respectable
language. At the bottom, anything goes. Politics at its best.

[^1]: The quotes in this essay are my own translations (from Romanian)
    of several texts retrieved on October 4, 2018 from the
    [website](http://coalitiapentrufamilie.ro) of the Coalition for
    Family

[^2]: Another justification given by the Coalition is that the revision
    of the constitution is meant to make the term "spouse" more precise,
    since its occurrence in the current version of the fundamental law
    is "vague and open interpretation". As the judge Daniel Morar noted
    in his [separate
    opinion](https://www.ccr.ro/files/products/Decizie_539_2018.pdf)
    (pp. 10ff) to the decision of the Constitutional Court of Romania to
    approve the referendum, this revision does not amount to a mere
    clarification of the legal text but to a significant change in
    meaning of the fundamental law, one that restricts "the scope of the
    institution of marriage" and brings about "the suppression of the
    right to same-sex marriage". Morar goes on to argue that this
    modification infringes on a fundamental right of Romanian citizens
    and is inconsistent with art. 26 of the Romanian Constitution on
    family life, and with the European and international legislation on
    family rights.

[^3]: An essential reference on the relationship between disgust and law
    is Martha C. Nussbaum 2009 *Hiding from Humanity: Disgust, Shame,
    and the Law*. Princeton University Press.

[^4]: Ian Kershaw 2010 *Hitler* Penguin.

[^5]: For a theory of propaganda, see Jason Stanley 2015 *How Propaganda
    Works* Princeton University Press.

[^6]: As always people can be found that support virtually any kind of
    view. For any silly idea, you'll find smart people advocating it. In
    particular, you'll find scientists saying that homosexuals are lousy
    parents and that consequently their kids suffer. Very likely, these
    scientists are wrong. There is a growing
    [consensus](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0049089X15001209)
    that gay parents raise healthy kids who are doing very well
    [emotionally and
    socially](https://whatweknow.inequality.cornell.edu/topics/lgbt-equality/what-does-the-scholarly-research-say-about-the-wellbeing-of-children-with-gay-or-lesbian-parents/).
    The pediatricians
    [concur](http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/early/2013/03/18/peds.2013-0377).
    The main threat to kids raised by gay parents is
    [discrimination](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/oct/23/children-raised-by-same-sex-parents-do-as-well-as-their-peers-study-shows).

[^7]: In Romania the Communists gave with one hand and took away with
    the other. They promoted women education and economic independence
    but they also subjected their bodies to the perceived needs of
    industrialization, putting a ban on contraception and abortion.

[^8]: A good comparative study of the 20th century families is Göran
    Therborn 2004 *Between Sex and Power: Family in the World*.

[^9]: The Coalition, in turn, has to thank [Family Watch
    International](https://familywatch.org/) -- an organization catering
    to the Fundamentalist Protestants in America -- for the lessons in
    political communication. It's ironical that we need a foreign
    think-tank to help us exhume our traditional values.
